Pages: 14
--- PAGE 1 ---
3928 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 17, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2024
M-DAFTO: Multi-Stage Deferred Acceptance Based
Fair Task Ofﬂoading in IoT-Fog Systems
Chittaranjan Swain , Graduate Student Member , IEEE, Manmath Narayan Sahoo , Member , IEEE,
Anurag Satpathy , Graduate Student Member , IEEE, Sambit Bakshi , Senior Member , IEEE,
and Soumya K. Ghosh , Senior Member , IEEE
Abstract—Resource-constrained Internet of Things (IoT) de-
vices depend on remote Cloud/Fog Nodes (FNs) to execute deadline-
sensitive services. Ofﬂoading computations of real-time services
to a remote cloud server results in intolerable latency due to
intermittent channels, higher transmission delays, and scarce spec-
trum resources. Therefore, ofﬂoading to nearby FNs is preferable;
however, it introduces several signiﬁcant issues: ( i) allocation of
limited FN resources, ( ii) deadline constraint of heterogeneous
services, and (iii) requirement of computationally inexpensive and
scalable strategies. This article proposes a M-DAFTO model to
tackle the abovementioned issues and generate a fair ofﬂoading
plan in polynomial time. The ofﬂoading problem is modeled as a
many-to-one matching game with maximum and minimum quotas
at each FN. Because the deferred acceptance (DA) algorithm fails
to operate with minimum quotas, we adopt a variant of the DA
algorithm, a multistage deferred acceptance (MSDA) algorithm, to
solve the ofﬂoading problem. The overall goal of M-DAFTO is to
reduce the aggregate ofﬂoading delay with increased assignment of
tasks to FNs. Extensive simulation and analysis conﬁrm a 30.26%
and a 93.53% reduction in ofﬂoading delay and outages (unassigned
tasks) compared to the baselines.
Index Terms —Task ofﬂoading, IoT, fog systems, matching
theory, deferred acceptance algorithm, analytic hierarchy process,
technique for order performance by similarity to ideal solution.
I. I NTRODUCTION
T
HE rapid growth of the Internet of Things (IoT) has facil-
itated the emergence of real-time services such as online
gaming, video streaming, facial recognition, health care, virtual
reality (VR), augmented reality (AR), and automated driving[1],
[2], [3]. The recent statistics published by the International Data
Corporation (IDC) state that 55.7billion devices will execute
such real-time services by 2025, 75% of which will be IoT.
These IoT devices are expected to generate73.1ZB of data [4].
Received 22 February 2023; revised 6 June 2024; accepted 26 July 2024.
Date of publication 2 August 2024; date of current version 30 December 2024.
(Corresponding author: Manmath Narayan Sahoo.)
Chittaranjan Swain, Manmath Narayan Sahoo, and Sambit Bakshi are with
the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
Technology, Rourkela, Odisha 769008, India (e-mail: chittaranjanswain518@
gmail.com; sahoom@nitrkl.ac.in; bakshisambit@ieee.org).
Anurag Satpathy is with the Department of Computer Science, Missouri
University of Science and Technology, Rolla, MO 65409 USA (e-mail:
anurag.satpathy@mst.edu).
Soumya K. Ghosh is with the Department of Computer Science and Engi-
neering, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, West Bengal 721302, India
(e-mail: skg@iitkgp.ac.in).
This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TSC.2024.3436648, provided by the authors.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TSC.2024.3436648
Real-time services often require adequate computing resources
for processing such sizeable data. However, IoT devices are often
resource-constrained and incapable of performing large-scale
computations, relying on remote devices for processing [5].
Remote processing, often referred to as ofﬂoading, is per-
formed in two modes depending on where the services are
executed. The ﬁrst execution mode directly ofﬂoads the ser-
vices to a remote cloud server [6]. This mode of execution is
infeasible for real-time services as higher latency is experienced
due to physical distance , intermittent WAN latency , network
congestion, and scarce spectrum resources [5]. To overcome
the pitfalls, an alternate execution mode involves ofﬂoading
computations to nearby fog nodes (FNs) instead of the remote
cloud server [1]. Additionally, ofﬂoading to FNs provides real-
time mobility support, location awareness, and geo-distributed
services [7]. Although ofﬂoading services to FNs is a sensible
option, generating an ofﬂoading plan for a densely connected
IoT-Fog network with heterogeneous resources is non-trivial
and introduces multiple research challenges. First, the delay
guarantee of real-time services is difﬁcult to achieve, especially
with the stochastic computational demands of IoTs and FNs.
Second, the contention of limited FN resources in a massive IoT
network often complicates the ofﬂoading decisions. Finally, the
requirement of scalable, computationally-inexpensive, and non-
clustered assignment assists in effectively utilizing the limited
FN resources and avoiding congestion.
The existing works on ofﬂoading focused on reducing the
ofﬂoading delay or outages, i.e., services overshooting the pre-
scribed deadlines. In this regard, works in [4], [8], [9] adopted
meta-heuristic strategies to generate an ofﬂoading schedule.
Though these approaches are acceptable, they are compute-
intensive, not scalable , and non-polynomial. Moreover, the
above-discussed approaches ignore the deadlines associated
with real-time services, thereby leading to quality-of-service
(QoS) violations [1]. The strategies discussed in [3], [10], [11],
[12] aimed to optimize the ofﬂoading delay adhering to the QoS
requirements in terms of the deadline. However, they may suffer
from clustered assignments, resulting in ineffective utilization
and congestion at the FNs. Therefore, this work proposes a
framework M-DAFTO to simultaneously reduce ofﬂoading de-
lays and outages. Adopting a multistage deferred acceptance
(MSDA) algorithm with maximum and minimum quotas at
the FNs assists in generating a polynomial time non-clustered
assignment.
1939-1374 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INST OF INFO TECH AND MANAGEMENT. Downloaded on June 08,2026 at 06:21:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 2 ---
SW AIN et al.: M-DAFTO: MULTI-STAGE DEFERRED ACCEPTANCE BASED FAIR TASK OFFLOADING IN IOT-FOG SYSTEMS 3929
A. Contributions
r We propose a novel frameworkM-DAFTO that generates a
fair ofﬂoading schedule focused on reducing the ofﬂoading
delay without compromising the QoS of services expressed
as their deadlines.
r The ofﬂoading between IoTs and FNs is designed as a
many-to-one matching game considering maximum and
minimum quotas at each FN. The adoption of such a solu-
tion approach introduces two challenges. First, setting the
minimum quota is arduous due to resource heterogeneity
at FNs. Second, generating the preferences of the FNs
is complex, especially considering multiple criteria such
as ofﬂoading delay, QoS, and feasible execution options.
We devise a novel strategy in Section V- Ato assign the
minimum quotas at FNs, which addresses the ﬁrst concern.
We also introduce a term called urgency in Section V- B
that captures the preferences of services obtained using
a combination of analytic hierarchy process (AHP) and
technique for order performance by similarity to the ideal
solution (TOPSIS).
r To obtain a fair ofﬂoading schedule, we adopt a variant of
the deferred acceptance algorithm called MSDA that takes
as input the processing order of the services in the form of
a precedence list (PL). The PL construction, as presented
in Section V- C, considers the demands, QoS, and feasible
execution options of different services.
r The performance of M-DAFTO is compared against three
different baselines: a matching theory framework for tasks
ofﬂoading in fog computing for IoT systems (MBTO)[13],
heuristic-based task ofﬂoading strategy [12], greedy place-
ment method (GPM)[14], and efﬁcient load-balanced strat-
egy for task ofﬂoading in IoT-Fog systems (LETO) [15].
Through exhaustive simulation and analysis, we infer that
M-DAFTOachieves a 30.26% reduction in ofﬂoading delay
and 93.53% reduction in the number of outages compared
to the baselines.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work that aims
to reduce the ofﬂoading delay and outages using a maximum-
minimum quota-based matching game. A preliminary version of
this work is published in a conference[15],w h e r ew ed i s c u s s e da
basic framework for modeling the ofﬂoading as a many-to-one
matching game with a maximum-minimum quota at the FNs.
The presented work in this article is a signiﬁcant extension that
overcomes the drawbacks and provides a comprehensive view
of the solution strategy with extensive simulation and analysis.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II dis-
cusses the literature we reviewed. SectionIII presents the system
model in detail. The overall problem is formulated in SectionIV.
Sections IV -Cand V discuss the ofﬂoading game and the solution
approach. Performance analysis of M-DAFTO is presented in
Section VI, and conclusions are drawn in Section VII.
II. R ELA TEDWORKS
This section discusses the relevant literature on ofﬂoading
from two aspects. First, we discuss strategies that solely focus
on addressing the reduction in the ofﬂoading delays. Reducing
the ofﬂoading delay without any impetus on the maximum
tolerable latency of individual services may not be suitable for
real-world services such as AR and VR, with stringent QoS
expressed in terms of their deadlines[16]. For such applications,
QoS violations can result in user dissatisfaction and loss of
revenue for the service providers (SPs) in the long run, [15].
Therefore, the second part of the survey discusses strategies that
consider both the ofﬂoading delay and outages while generating
an ofﬂoading plan.
The works in [4], [8], [9] developed meta-heuristic-based
solutions to reduce theofﬂoading delayin complex fog networks.
In this regard, Kishor et al. [4] discussed an efﬁcient ofﬂoad-
ing policy based on a smart ant colony optimization (SACO).
Alternatively, a genetic algorithm (GA)–based swift ofﬂoading
policy for sensors in an intelligent city network is discussed
in [8]. On the other hand, Wang and Chen [9] considered a setup
that considered both local and FN resources in making joint
ofﬂoading decisions. A GA and simulated annealing (SA)–based
hybrid strategy is adopted to generate the ofﬂoading schedule.
Some other works discussed in [17], [18], [22], and [23] have
also modeled ofﬂoading as an optimization. Although the above-
discussed approaches generate acceptable solutions, they are
inefﬁcient, time-consuming, and not scalable [1]. To overcome
the lacunas of optimization solvers, authors in [13], [19], [20],
[21] proposed game-theoretic solutions. In this regard, Nowak
et al. [21] modeled the association between the access point and
cloudlets as a non-cooperative game. On the other hand, Chitti
et al. [13],a n dA l ie ta l . [20] formulated the ofﬂoading as a
one-to-many matching game and solved it using a variation of the
DA algorithm. Alternatively, authors in[19] imposed maximum
and minimum quotas at the FNs to achieve a non-clustered as-
signment. They solved the matching problem using a multi-stage
deferred acceptance (MSDA) algorithm. Additionally, works
in [24], [25] focused on reducing theofﬂoading delayin different
environments.
As discussed earlier, a more realistic setup involves running
services within their speciﬁed deadlines. In this context, Za-
kariya et al. [10] discussed a GA-based solution that aims to
minimize the outages without compromising much with the of-
ﬂoading latency. Deng et al. [11] proposed a novel hybrid meta-
heuristic scheme to execute maximum ofﬂoaded tasks within
their respective deadlines to obtain the best of both worlds. The
authors hybridized GA and Particle swarm optimization (PSO)
to obtain a sub-optimal solution. Deviating from meta-heuristic-
based solutions, Adhikari et al. [3] proposed a delay-dependent
priority-aware heuristic ofﬂoading strategy called DPTO. The
authors assign task priorities based on their deadlines and use
a multilevel feedback queue to schedule ofﬂoaded tasks. Al-
ternatively, in [15], the authors formulated the ofﬂoading as
a one-to-many matching-based with maximum and minimum
quotas at the FNs to achieve a non-clustered assignment. The
MSDA algorithm was adopted to solve the matching game,
which yielded a PL fair ofﬂoading schedule. Some other works
on vehicular networks focused on ofﬂoading latency reduction
with deadline speciﬁcations are discussed in [26], [27], [28].
It may be noted from the above discussion that ofﬂoading
has been studied and investigated in the existing literature.
Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INST OF INFO TECH AND MANAGEMENT. Downloaded on June 08,2026 at 06:21:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 3 ---
3930 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 17, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2024
TABLE I
COMPARISON OF OFFLOADING SCHEMES
Fig. 1. An IoT-Fog network comprising multiple IoT devices and FNs com-
municating over a wireless channel.
Most of the literature focuses on reducing the ofﬂoading delay
without the impetus to meet the deadlines. Moreover, the limited
literature considers both optimization and meta-heuristics-based
solutions. The former is time-consuming and suffers from inef-
ﬁciency, whereas the latter is computationally expensive and is
not scalable . Therefore, this paper proposes a matching-based
solution approach called M-DAFTO. It simultaneously aims to
minimize the ofﬂoading delay and outages in a polynomial
time, ensuring a non-clustered assignment at the FNs. This
can be achieved by introducing a minimum quota at each FN.
Further, Section-V- Adiscusses a minimum quota determination
algorithm. Table I provides a comparative analysis of literature
based on solution approaches and parameters used.
III. S YSTEM MODEL
Fig. 1 represents the overall architecture of an IoT-Fog net-
work comprising m IoTs and n FNs. Each IoT di generates
an indivisible task ti and T = {t1,t2,t3,...,t m} captures
all such tasks. The device di, i.e., i ∈[1,m], is assumed to
be resource-constrained and incapable of local execution [1].
Hence, for execution, the devices are computationally dependent
on nearby FNs captured by F = {f1,f2,f3,...,f n}. More-
over, an ofﬂoading request of ti is represented as a quadruple
<s in
i ,ηi,Δi,s out
i >. Here,sin
i andsout
i denote input and output
size (in bits) whereasηi andΔi represent the computational de-
mand (in cycles) and deadline (ins). The computational resource
of a FN Cj (cycles/sec) is logically partitioned into ‘x’ isolated
executable entities termed virtual resource units (VRUs) [1],
such thatx ∈Z+.L e tλj (cycles/sec) be the compute capability
of a VRU at fj , derived by dividing FN’s computational ca-
pability by the number of VRUs. We assume computationally
identical VRUs within a FN [1], [5]. For instance, if fj has a
computational capability of 4 GHz, andx =4 , then each VRU’s
assigned computational capacity would be 1GHz. Heterogeneity
is imparted by ensuring λj ̸= λj′ , j ̸= j′. Opting for homo-
geneous VRUs at a FN simpliﬁes the modeling and problem
formulation [5]. Regardless of the differences in computational
capability among VRUs within and across FNs, M-DAFTO
effortlessly generates the ofﬂoading plan. The number of VRUs
at fj is denoted as its maximum quota h(fj), representing
the number of ofﬂoaded tasks simultaneously executed at fj .
We also impose a minimum quota l(fj) at fj to guarantee a
non-clustered assignment (refer to Section I).
Relationship Between FN Parameters: Considering the com-
pute capacity of a VRUλj and that of FNfj , λj ≤Cj holds such
that Cj = x∗λj,x ∈Z+. Furthermore, if fj has ‘x’ VRUs, its
maximum quota can be set as h(fj)= x. Note that our model
does not focus on determining ‘x’; we assume it to be an integral
value.
Delays in Ofﬂoading: The latency incurred in the ofﬂoading
procedure is the aggregation of the following delays ( i) com-
munication delay and (ii) execution delay. The former involves
transmitting the ofﬂoaded task to the designated FN and re-
ceiving the processed output. The latter captures the delay in
executing the ofﬂoaded task at the FN.
A. Communication Delay
The aggregate delay in the communication phase encom-
passes (i) transmission delay and (ii) receiving delay.
Transmission Delay:It captures the time needed to send a task
ti from a device di to FN fj for its computation. Following [1],
we assume the presence of an active uplink and downlink chan-
nel for each IoT device captured as Bu
i,j and Bd
j,i, respectively.
Let ptp
i represent the transmission power of IoT device di, and
hi,j indicates the channel gain from di to fj with noise power
n0. Therefore, the effective uplink data rate Ri,j is derived as
per (1).
Ri,j = Bu
i,j ∗log2
(
1+ ptp
i ∗hi,j
n0
)
(1)
Taking sin
i and Ri,j , the transmission delay (Dtd
i,j) from IoT
devicedi to FN fj can be calculated as per (2).
Dtd
i,j = sin
i
Ri,j
(2)
Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INST OF INFO TECH AND MANAGEMENT. Downloaded on June 08,2026 at 06:21:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 4 ---
SW AIN et al.: M-DAFTO: MULTI-STAGE DEFERRED ACCEPTANCE BASED FAIR TASK OFFLOADING IN IOT-FOG SYSTEMS 3931
Receiving Delay: It indicates the time to receive the processed
output fromfj .L e tptp
j denote the transmission power offj , and
hj,i be the channel gain between fj and di. The downlink rate
Rj,i is determined as per (3).
Rj,i = Bd
j,i ∗log2
(
1+
ptp
j ∗hj,i
n0
)
(3)
Consideringsout
i andRj,i, the receiving delay (Drd
j,i) is derived
as (4).
Drd
j,i = sout
i
Rj,i
(4)
B. Computation of Execution Delay
The execution delay (Ded
i,j )o ft a s kti at FN fj depends on (i)
computational requirement of ti, i.e., ηi and (ii) computational
capability of a VRU atfj , i.e., λj . Considering these parameters,
it can be derived as per (5).
Ded
i,j = ηi
λj
(5)
C. Ofﬂoading Delay
The ofﬂoading delay (Dof f
i,j )o f ti is the sum of all delays in-
curred while ofﬂoading (transmission, execution, and receiving)
and can be derived as per (6).
Dof f
i,j = Dtd
i,j +Ded
i,j +Drd
j,i (6)
IV . PROBLEM FORMULA TION
In this work, we formulate the overall problem as a mini-
mization function to reduce the aggregate ofﬂoading delay.W e
also ensure a non-clustered assignment of tasks to FNs without
compromising the objective mentioned above.
A. Constraints on Ofﬂoading
Before deﬁning the constraints imposed, we introduce a bi-
nary indicator variable χi,j expressed as per (7).
χi,j =
{
1 If task ti is assigned to the FN fj
0 otherwise (7)
1) Delay Constraint: This constraint guarantees that the of-
ﬂoaded tasks meet their deadline requirements, which is crucial
for time-sensitive tasks. Equation (8) captures this constraint.
Dof f
i,j ≤Δi (8)
2) Assignment Constraint: It ensures that a task can be of-
ﬂoaded at most one FNfj ∈F. Further, this constraint captures
a full ofﬂoading scenario considered in M-DAFTO and is ex-
pressed as (9).
n∑
j=1
χi,j ≤1; ∀i ∈[1,m] (9)
3) Capacity Constraint: A maximum of h(fj) ofﬂoaded
tasks can be executed parallelly at a FNfj ∈F. This is captured
in (10).
m∑
i=1
χi,j ≤h(fj); h(fj) > 0; ∀j ∈[1,n] (10)
4) Minimum Quota Constraint: Minimum quota l(fj) of a
FN fj ∈F is upper-bounded by its maximum quota h(fj),a s
captured in (11).
l(fj) ≤h(fj); l(fj) ≥0; ∀j ∈[1,n] (11)
5) Max-Min Constraint: The max-min constraint ensures
that the ofﬂoaded tasks, i.e., |T | should be within the range
of the cumulative minimum quotas and the sum of maximum
quotas, considering all fj ∈F. This requirement is expressed
as (12).
n∑
j=1
l(fj) ≤| T|≤
n∑
j=1
h(fj) (12)
B. Objective of M-DAFTO
M-DAFTO aims to reduce the total ofﬂoading delay in the
IoT-Fog network.
1) Minimization of Total Ofﬂoading Delay: The total of-
ﬂoading delay (Aof f) incurred in successfully ofﬂoading the
tasks to FNs in the IoT-Fog network and can be derived as per
(13).
Aof f =
⎛
⎝
m∑
i=1
n∑
j=1
χi,j ∗Dof f
i,j
⎞
⎠ (13)
2) Objective F ormulation and Constraints for M-DAFTO:
M-DAFTO’s objective is expressed as per (14a). Conditions
(14b), (14c), (14d), (14e), and (14f) respectively capture the
delay, assignment, capacity, minimum quota, and max-min con-
straints. The values of variables are captured as Constraint(14g).
minimize : Aof f (14a)
s.t. Dof f
i,j ≤Δi (14b)
n∑
j=1
χi,j ≤1 (14c)
m∑
i=1
χi,j ≤h(fj); h(fj) > 0 (14d)
l(fj) ≤h(fj); l(fj) ≥0, (14e)
n∑
j=1
l(fj) ≤| T|≤
n∑
j=1
h(fj) (14f)
∀i ∈[1,m], ∀j ∈[1,n] (14g)
The problem captured as (14a) is NP -Hard enforcing an
ardent challenge is obtaining a polynomial time solution [1].
In this regard, M-DAFTO models the ofﬂoading as a matching
game focused on achieving afair assignment in polynomial time.
Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INST OF INFO TECH AND MANAGEMENT. Downloaded on June 08,2026 at 06:21:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 5 ---
3932 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 17, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2024
Fig. 2. Components of M-DAFTO and their interactions.
The working of M-DAFTO is shown in Fig. 2, and the problem
is subsequently formulated.
C. Task Ofﬂoading as a Matching Game
The objective of M-DAFTO is to minimize total ofﬂoading
delay. M-DAFTO achieves this objective through a matching
game between tasks and FNs, considering the preferences of
both agents.
Relationship of Task-FN Matching With M-DAFTO’s Objec-
tive: M-DAFTO considers a many-to-one matching between
tasks (T ) and FNs (F), referred to as agents. Before assignment
(Algorithm 9), an agent ranks some/all agents in the opposite
set (Algorithm 2). For instance, tasks rank the FNs in increasing
order of ofﬂoading delays. FNs order tasks in decreasing urgen-
cies (17), which considers the deadline, ofﬂoading delay, and the
number of feasible execution execution options. The proposal
order is derived as a PL by considering the CPU demand, the
deadline, and the number of feasible execution options for each
task (Algorithm 8). These data structures serve as inputs to
the mapping and facilitate achieving the objective outlined in
(14a). The ofﬂoading delay and outages signiﬁcantly impact
the mapping game by directly inﬂuencing the preferences of
tasks and FNs. For instance, a task would ideally prefer to be
ofﬂoaded to an FN with a lower ofﬂoading delay, making it
logical to rank FNs in increasing order of ofﬂoading delays.
Conversely, FNs prefer tasks with higher urgency to meet their
delay requirements.
Deﬁnition 1. (Preference Relation): A matching over set T
andF has the same number of preference relations, i.e.,≻ti and
≻fj . The former enables an agent ti ∈T to rank the agents in
F, whereas the latter allows conversely.
A preference relation ti ≻fj ti′ indicates that fj assigns a
higher rank to ti overti′ .I n M-DAFTO, an agents preference is
strict, transitive, and incomplete relation. Collectively, the pref-
erence relations of an agent a ∈T∪F is called its preference
proﬁle and is captured as pref(a).
Deﬁnition 2. (Ofﬂoading Game): The matching game be-
tween T and F is a many-to-one mapping Υ: T∪ F→ 2T ∪
2F , satisfying the conditions below:
Condition 2.1: Each ti ∈T , |Υ(ti)| ≯ 1 andΥ(ti) ⊆F
Condition 2.2: Each fj ∈F, Υ(fj) ⊆T , and |Υ(fj)|≤
h(fj)
Condition 2.3: Forti andfj , ti ∈Υ(fj) ⇐⇒fj ∈Υ(ti)
Condition (2.1) speciﬁes that each task ti can be assigned to
only one FN, signifying a full ofﬂoading scenario. Considering
the capacity of FNs to handle multiple tasks, Condition ( 2.2)
ensures that FN fj is constrained to hosting a maximum of
h(fj) ofﬂoaded tasks. Finally, Condition ( 2.3) emphasizes the
symmetry in the task-to-FN mapping, afﬁrming that ti is paired
with fj if and only if fj is paired with ti in Υ.
Deﬁnition 3. (Individual Rationality): The assignment Υ is
individually rational iff it satisﬁes the following:
Condition 3.1: ti ∈Υ(fj) andfj /∈pref(ti).
Condition 3.2: fj ∈Υ(ti) andti /∈pref(fj).
Individually rational outcomes, as delineated in Conditions
(3.1) and (3.2) of Deﬁnition 3, pertain to assignments or
allocations that take into account acceptable participants or
agents [29]. This concept centers on meeting the criteria for
individual satisfaction by accommodating the decision-making
preferences of each participant. Additionally, in the context of
matching-based assignments, it is imperative to uphold each
agent’s rationality, ensuring both rational and efﬁcient assign-
ments.
Deﬁnition 4. (Blocking Pair): A pair (ti,f j) blocks the
matchingΥsubject to the adherence of the following conditions:
Condition 4.1: ti /∈Υ(fj) andfj /∈Υ(ti)
Condition 4.2: fj ≻ti fj′ , fj′ ∈Υ(ti) and|Υ(fj)| =0
Condition 4.3: ti ≻fj ti′ , where ti′ ∈Υ(fj)
Condition ( 4.1) states that ti and fj are not matched in Υ.
Condition (4.2) reﬂects thatti blocks the matchingΥiff it prefers
fj over its current match fj′ . According to Condition ( 4.3), fj
blocks the matching Υ, if there exists a ti′ ∈Υ(fj) such that it
prefersti overti′ .
Deﬁnition 5. (Fairness): A fair matching Υhas no blocking
pairs.
The absence of blocking pairs is the crucial criterion to achieve
fairness. However, obtaining a fair match meeting the minimum
quota constraint expressed in (11) is not always possible. This
can be illustrated using an example scenario in Appendix A.3,
available online. Therefore, a relaxed deﬁnition of fairness
called PL-fairness is proposed that disallows the presence of
PL-blocked pairs [30].
Deﬁnition 6. (PL-Blocked Pair): A matching Υ is said to
be PL-blocked by a pair of agents (ti,f j) iff it satisﬁes the
conditions of Deﬁnition 4 and the following condition
ti ≻PL ti′,i ̸= i′ (15)
Equation (15) states that ti appears before ti′ in the PL.
Moreover, the PL enforces a strict processing order for the tasks
to ensure a PL-fair matching.
Deﬁnition 7. (PL-Fairness): If a matchingΥcontains no PL-
Blocked Pair, it is considered a PL-fair matching.
A PL holds signiﬁcance in establishing the priority or pref-
erences of agents during each stage of the matching process.
Its crucial role lies in shaping the outcomes of the matching
algorithm by providing a predeﬁned order in which agents are
considered for potential matches. This mechanism promotes
Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INST OF INFO TECH AND MANAGEMENT. Downloaded on June 08,2026 at 06:21:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 6 ---
SW AIN et al.: M-DAFTO: MULTI-STAGE DEFERRED ACCEPTANCE BASED FAIR TASK OFFLOADING IN IOT-FOG SYSTEMS 3933
fairness and contributes to the stability and consistency of match-
ing process outputs.
Deﬁnition 8. (Wastefulness): A wasteful matchingΥsatisﬁes
the following conditions:
Condition 8.1: ∃fj such that |Υ(fj)| <l (fj)
or
Condition 8.2: ∃fj such that:
a) ∃(ti,f j′) | ti ∈Υ(fj′) andfj′ ∈Υ(ti)
b) fj ≻ti fj′ and|Υ(fj)| <h (fj)
c) There exists another matching Υ′ such that Υ′ =( Υ∪
{(ti,f j)})\{(ti,f j′)} and|Υ(fj′)|≥ l(fj′)
Condition ( 8.1) implies that there exists FN fj ∈F,t h e
minimum quota of which is not satisﬁed. Condition ( 8.2)(a)
ensures that ti and fj are matched in Υ. Condition ( 8.2)(b)
afﬁrms that a taskti can claim an empty VRU at fj if the taskti
prefersfj over its current matchfj′ andfj can accommodate it.
Condition (8.2)(c) implies that there exists another matching Υ′
where(ti,fj) can be paired without violation of minimum quota
constraint at fj′ in Υ. The concept of the “wasteful property”
elucidates a scenario where speciﬁc agents are allocated less
preferred assignments in later stages, even though they had the
chance to secure more preferred options earlier. This is deemed
as inefﬁciency or “waste” within the allocation process.
Deﬁnition 9. (Strong Stability): A strongly stablematchingΥ
satisﬁes properties of individual rationality, fairness, and non-
wastefulness.
With maximum and minimum quotas at each FN, thestrongly
stable matching is not always possible [30]. The details can be
found in Appendices A.1, A.2, and A.3, available online.
Deﬁnition 10. (Partial Stability): A partially stable matching
Υ satisﬁes the properties of individual rationality and PL-
fairness.
V. S OLUTION APPROACH
Traditionally, the deferred acceptance (DA) algorithm has
been successfully used to obtain a stable assignment in dif-
ferent scenarios [1], [20], [31]. However, the DA algorithm
fails to generate a matching that meets the minimum quota
of agents [30]. This is highlighted using an example presented
in Appendix B, available online. Therefore, in M-DAFTO,w e
utilize an improved version of the DA algorithm called the
MSDA algorithm that achieves a partially stable assignment.
Although the adoption of the MSDA algorithm meets the design
objective of M-DAFTO, it introduces the following additional
research challenges. First,i n M-DAFTO context, setting the
minimum quota is non-trivial owing to the heterogeneous nature
of FNs. Second, designing an agent’s preferences is particularly
challenging as M-DAFTO caters to multiple parameters. Third,
determining the order of the tasks for processing is crucial
and more challenging because of their heterogeneous ofﬂoading
requests. Subsequently, we discuss sophisticated procedures to
address each research challenge.
A. Determination of Minimum Quota of FNs
In [15], [19], the authors have considered a random assign-
ment policy for setting the minimum quota of FNs in the range
Algorithm 1: Minimum Quota Determination (MQD):
[0,⌊|T |
|F| ⌋]. Here, |T |and|F| represent the total number of tasks
to be ofﬂoaded and the number of FNs in the network. Similar
assignment policies have also been followed in [30], [32].H o w -
ever, such assignment policies are irrational and cannot directly
be incorporated in M-DAFTO for the following reasons. For a
p a i ro fF N s ,(fj,f j′) ∈F with λj > λj′ , a random allocation
can lead to an assignment such that l(fj′) >l (fj), which is in-
consistent.T h i sinconsistency compromises the ofﬂoading delay
by assigning a higher minimum quota to a less computationally
efﬁcient FN. This results in undesirable allocations and impacts
M-DAFTO design objective. Therefore, a sophisticated mini-
mum quota determination (MQD) procedure is proposed, which
takes the computational capability λj , ∀fj ∈F and ensures
consistent assignments.
1) Minimum Quota Determination: The overall working of
MQD follows Algorithm1.( i) two sets of agents -T ,F,( ii) max-
imum quota h(fj),∀fj ∈F, and ( iii) computational capability
λj, ∀fj ∈F are taken as input. The algorithm outputs the mini-
mum quotal(fj),∀fj ∈F. MQD executes as follows. All FNs’
minimum quotas are initialized to 0, i.e., l(fj)=0 ,∀fj ∈F.
Letfj be the most computationally efﬁcient FN, and its compu-
tational capability is λmax. The minimum quota offj is then set
tomin((h(fj),⌊|T |
|F| ⌋). Allocating minimum quota to the FNs in
the range [0,⌊|T |
|F| ⌋] ensures the feasibility of allocation (refer
to (14f)). we adopt a proportionate assignment of minimum
quotas for remaining FN ( fj′ ∈F\{ fj}) in decreasing order
of their computational capabilities. This ensures for a pair of
FNs(fj,f j′) ∈F if λj > λj′ thenl(fj) >l (fj′), improving the
objective of M-DAFTO.
B. Preference Proﬁles of Agents
The preference of an agenta ∈T∪F is captured aspref(a).
It’s important to note that an agent’s preference reﬂects its level
of ﬂexibility, representing the number of potential partners an
agent can choose. In the context of M-DAFTO, the degree of
freedom for a taskti and FNfj is precisely deﬁned by|pref(ti)|
and|pref(fj)|, respectively.
1) Preference of Tasks: Each task ti ∈T ranks the FNs in
non-decreasing order of the ofﬂoading delay where ∀fj ∈F
and Δi ≥Dof f
i,j , thereby boosting the objective of M-DAFTO.
For instance, a task ti prefers a FN fj overfj′ iff the ofﬂoading
Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INST OF INFO TECH AND MANAGEMENT. Downloaded on June 08,2026 at 06:21:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 7 ---
3934 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 17, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2024
Algorithm 2: Preference Generation of FN (PGF).
delay at fj is less than fj′ . Therefore,
fj ≻ti fj′ ⇐⇒ Dof f
i,j <D of f
i,j′ ; j ̸= j′ (16)
2) Task Urgency Computation: FNs focus on executing tasks
within their prescribed deadlines to meet M-DAFTO’s agenda.
However, due to incomplete preferences, preferential ofﬂoading
based on the nearest deadline may not guarantee allocations.
Therefore, a metric called urgency associated with each task
ti ∈T is coined. It captures the priority of a task ti at FN
fj considering ( i.) buffer time: Δi −Dof f
i,j and ( ii.) number
of feasible executing options: |pref(ti)|. The former assists in
prioritizing tasks with ofﬂoading delay closer to the deadline,
whereas the latter helps reduce unassigned tasks. Therefore,
a merged valuation helps achieve M-DAFTO’s objective. The
urgency ofti atfj (uj
ti ) is derived as per (17). The weights (w1,
w2) and task urgencies are determined via Algorithms 3 and 7,
respectively.
uj
ti = w1 ∗ 1
(Δi −Dof f
i,j )
+w2 ∗ 1
|pref(ti)| (17)
3) Preference of FNs: A pair of tasksti andti′ to be executed
at fj are ranked in non-increasing order of their urgencies.
Therefore,
ti ≻fj ti′ ⇐⇒ uj
ti >u j
ti′ ; i ̸= i′
The preferences of the FNs are computed as per the Preference
Generation of FN procedure (PGF), i.e., Algorithm 2).
The PGF takes as input a set of criteria C,as e to ft a s k sti ∈
T , and the set of FNs fj ∈F. It outputs the preference list of
each FN fj , i.e., pref(fj)∀fj ∈F. PGF executes as follows.
Initially, the preference list of each FN fj is set to Φ. The FN fj
that has|T ′| > 1 invokes two algorithms: (i) AHP-based Criteria
Weight (ACW) (Algorithm 3) and ( ii) the TOPSIS-based Rank
Determination (TRD) (Algorithm 7). The former obtains criteria
Algorithm 3: AHP-Based Criteria Weight (ACW).
weights, whereas the latter takes criteria weights as input to rank
all the tasks in T ′.
4) AHP-Based Criteria Weight Determination: Algorithm 3
takes the criteria set C as input and outputs the weight wx
corresponding to each criterion cx, retained in a row vector W.
Algorithm 3 commences by initializing flag to false. It then
initiates the Pairwise Comparison Matrix Computation (PMC)
procedure as per Algorithm 4. It assigns the relative weights of
criteria taken as user inputs (Steps 2-10 of Algorithm 4). Note
that the relative weights are assigned following the linear judg-
ment scale [33]. Finally, PMC outputs a pairwise comparison
matrix P . After generating the pairwise comparison matrix, the
Criteria Weight Determination (CWD) procedure (Algorithm
5) is invoked. Algorithm 5 ﬁrst performs the column-wise nor-
malization of P (Steps 2-4 of Algorithm 5). The normalized
matrix P is subsequently averaged row-wise to obtain a column
vectorW containing the criteria weights (Steps 5-7 of Algorithm
5). Once Algorithm 5 terminates, the Consistency Check (CC)
procedure via Algorithm 6 is performed. The weights obtained
via Algorithm 3 are auto consistent iff|C| =2 , and consistency
checking is not called for[33]. A consistency check is mandatory
for all other cases and proceeds as follows. It encompasses
the veriﬁcation of the obtained weights within the allowable
deviation range measured via consistency ratio CR. Note that
the random index with RI is set following the ﬁndings of[33].I f
the consistency check passes, theflag is set to true, and weights
are retained in W (Steps 7-8 of Algorithm 3). Alternatively,
inconsistent weight iteratively triggers Algorithms 4, 5, and 6
till a weight vector passes the consistency check (Steps 9-14 of
Algorithm 3).
5) TOPSIS-Based Task Ranking: After obtaining the criteria
weights, TRD, as depicted in Algorithm 7, is invoked. It takes
as input ( i) decision matrix D,( ii) weight vector W (obtained
via AHP), ( iii) set of criteria C and ( iv) set of alternatives
Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INST OF INFO TECH AND MANAGEMENT. Downloaded on June 08,2026 at 06:21:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 8 ---
SW AIN et al.: M-DAFTO: MULTI-STAGE DEFERRED ACCEPTANCE BASED FAIR TASK OFFLOADING IN IOT-FOG SYSTEMS 3935
Algorithm 4: Pairwise-Comparison Matrix Computation
(PMC).
Algorithm 5: Criteria Weight Determination (CWD).
Algorithm 6: Consistency Check (CC).
A such that A⊆T . Algorithm 7 outputs a ranking for the
alternatives and proceeds as follows. The decision matrix D
is ﬁrst column-wise normalized (Steps 2-5). Next, normalized
matrix D is then transformed into a weighted normalization
matrix D′ (Steps 6-8). The ideal best (V+
cy orV−
cy ) and worst (V−
cy
Algorithm 7: TOPSIS-Based Rank Determination (TRD).
orV+
cy ) values speciﬁc to each criterionc ∈C are computed next
(Steps 9-15). Note that the criterion for which a higher value is
acceptable is beneﬁcial. Then, the euclidean distance from the
ideal best and worst denoted by
√
u+
ti and
√
u−
ti respectively is
determined for each alternative ti ∈A. Finally, the utility score
uti of an alternativeti ∈A is calculated and added into a global
utility score vector U (Steps 16-20). The alternatives are then
sequenced in non-increasing order of their utilities.
C. Computation of Precedence List
The precedence list (PL) contains all the tasks of T in non-
increasing order of their utility scores. To generate the utility
score of a task, we consider its ( i) Computational demand, i.e.,
ηi,( ii) deadline, i.e.,Δi, and (iii) feasible execution options, i.e.,
|pref(ti)|. The consideration of computational demand allows
the assignment of larger tasks onto computationally efﬁcient
FNs, assisting in reducing ofﬂoading delay. The deadline and
feasible options boost the possibility of assignments, reduc-
ing the unassigned tasks. Therefore, considering the above-
discussed parameters helps M-DAFTO achieve its design goals.
Considering multiple attributes drives us to adopt a hybrid
AHP-TOPSIS-based strategy that outputs a ranking of tasks. In
Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INST OF INFO TECH AND MANAGEMENT. Downloaded on June 08,2026 at 06:21:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 9 ---
3936 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 17, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2024
Algorithm 8: Precedence List Construction (PLC).
Algorithm 9: Multistage Deferred Acceptance (MSDA).
fact the ranking of tasks ti and ti′ follows (18).
ti ≻PL ti′ ⇐⇒ uti >u ti′ ; i ̸= i′ (18)
The detailed working procedure of precedence list computation
is explained in Algorithm 8.
D. Partially Stable Matching via MSDA Algorithm
The overall working of the MSDA algorithm is shown in
Algorithm 9. The inputs to the algorithm are: (i)s e t sT andF,( ii)
a precedence list, PL, (iii) maximum and minimum quota,h(fj)
andl(fj),∀fj ∈F, and (iv) preferences of agents inT∪ F.T h e
algorithm outputs a partially stable matching M that comprises
matched pairs ( ti, fj). The algorithm starts by initializing the
matching of agents in T∪ F to Φ. As the matching procedure
iterates over multiple stages, we deﬁne an iterator k that tracks
the executing stage of the MSDA algorithm. Prior to stage 1,
R0 is initialized to T and hk(fj) and lk(fj) are respectively
initialized to maximum quota h(fj) and minimum quota l(fj)
of fj . Each task ti is set to be free, indicating its availability
in the matching procedure (Steps 2-3 of Algorithm 9). MSDA
procedure then extracts the least preferred rk tasks in PL and
retains them in Rk(Steps 5-6 of Algorithm 9). Depending on
Rk−1 \ Rk, MSDA procedure triggers Algorithm10 (DA) either
with maximum or minimum quota. The existence of at least one
task in (Rk−1 \ Rk) indicates the availability of additional tasks
(Rk−1 \ Rk) after reservation. Hence, DA is triggered for these
additional tasks with maximum quotas of FNs (Steps 7-10 of
Algorithm 9). On the other hand, if Rk−1 \ Rk equals Φ,D A
is invoked for Rk tasks with minimum quotas of FNs (Steps
11-16 of Algorithm 9). After executing DA, the maximum and
minimum quota of FNs are updated, and upon exhaustion of
PL, the ﬁnal matching M is returned. Algorithm 10 enters the
proposal phase, wherein an unassigned task ti proposes to its
most preferred FN fj′ . Depending on the updated quota sk(fj′)
of fj′ either of the following cases may be encountered: ( i)i t
has sufﬁcient resources ( ii) it does not have enough resources.
In the former, ti and fj′ are matched (Steps 6-10 of Algorithm
10). The latter is subdivided into two cases depending on the
preference of ti at fj′ .I f ti′ ≻fj′ ti , where ti′ is the worst
assigned task, ti is rejected. Alternatively,ti ≻fj′ ti′ ,t i replaces
ti′ and in the present iteration, the addition of the task ti′ to the
set T provides an opportunity for assignment (Steps 12-23 of
Algorithm 10). Note that a true value for the status variable DA
allows for replacement; otherwise, it does not. The motivation
for disallowing replacements is to abide by the minimum quota
constraints imposed [30]. During the last iteration, M-DAFTO
focuses on fulﬁlling the minimum quotas at FNs by allocating
all tasks designated for the minimum quota stage from the PL.
Nevertheless, this compulsory allocation could result in an unfair
distribution, potentially introducing blocking pairs, as deﬁned in
Deﬁnition 4. Such situations may prompt individuals to deviate
from their existing agent allocation. To mitigate this concern and
promote fairness in the distribution of tasks and FNs according
to the PL, the concept of PL-fairness is introduced. It aims to
eliminate incentives for participants to alter their allocations.
1) A Toy Example: To illustrate the working of M-DAFTO,
we consider an example with ﬁve tasks {t1,t2,t3,t4,t5},
and three FNs {f1,f2,f3}. The preference proﬁles of tasks,
pref(ti), ∀i ∈[1,5] and that of FNs, pref(fj), ∀j ∈[1,3]
are shown in Tables II and III respectively. Table III also
captures the maximum and minimum quotas of each fj ,
denoted by h(fj) and l(fj), respectively. Additionally, we
Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INST OF INFO TECH AND MANAGEMENT. Downloaded on June 08,2026 at 06:21:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 10 ---
SW AIN et al.: M-DAFTO: MULTI-STAGE DEFERRED ACCEPTANCE BASED FAIR TASK OFFLOADING IN IOT-FOG SYSTEMS 3937
Algorithm 10: Deferred Acceptance (DA).
TABLE II
PREFERENCES OF TASKS
consider a PL that follows the ordering {t1,t2,t3,t4,t5}.I n i -
tially, R0 = {t1,t2,t3,t4,t5}. Algorithm 9 executes in multiple
stages tracked by the variable k. At stage k of MSDA, Algo-
rithm 10 is invoked with either maximum or minimum quota
of the FNs depending upon the number of unprocessed tasks
captured by |Rk−1 \ Rk|. If there are no unprocessed tasks,
i.e., |Rk−1 \ Rk| = 0, DA is invoked with minimum quotas,
otherwise with maximum quotas. In the ﬁrst stage ( k = 1), r1
= 3, hence r1 least preferred tasks, i.e., {t3,t4,t5} are reserved
from PL and retained in R1 for processing at a later stage. As
R0 \ R1 is not empty, Algorithm 10 is invoked for tasks{t1,t2}
with maximum quotas of FNs. Following Algorithm 10, tasks
TABLE III
PREFERENCES OF FNS
t1 and t2 send proposals to their most preferred FN f2.T h e
proposals are accommodated at f2, and available resources at
f2 denoted by s1(f2) are updated to 1. Note that the processed
tasks are removed from PL. Hence, the updated PL at the end
stage 1 contains{t3,t4,t5}. Additionally, Stage 1 terminates by
updating the current maximum quota h2(f2) to 1 and minimum
quota l2(f2) to 0. MSDA then enters the second stage ( k =
2), where r2 = 2 and R2 = {t4,t5}.A s R1 \ R2 ̸=Φ,D Ai s
invoked for task t3 with maximum quotas at FNs. t3 proposes
to its most preferred FN f1 and is matched. Hence, the available
resources at f1 denoted by s2(f1) is updated to 1. Then MSDA
updates PL, maximum quotah3(f1), and minimum quotal3(f1)
to{t4,t5}, 1, and 0 respectively. MSDA executes its third stage
(k = 3), where r3 = 1 and R3 = {t5}. DA is triggered for the
only taskt4 which is subsequently matched tof2 ands3(f2) and
PL are updated to 0 and{t5}, respectively. Here, both maximum
quotah3(f3) and minimum quotal3(f3) are updated to 0. In the
fourth stage, r4 = 1, R4 = {t5}, R4 \ R3 =Φ, hence DA is
invoked for t5 with minimum quotas. f1, f2 reject t5 owing to
exhaustion of minimum quotas. Therefore,t5 is ﬁnally matched
to f3, which terminates the MSDA. The ﬁnal matching M =
{(t1,f2), (t2, f2), (t3, f1), (t4, f2), (t5, f3)}.
Theorem 1. (PL-Fairness): MSDA produces a PL-fair match-
ing between the set of tasks T and FNs F.
Proof: The proof can be found in Appendix D.1, available
online. □
Theorem 2. (Individual Rationality): MSDA produces a indi-
vidual rationality matching between the set T andF.
Proof: The proof is detailed in Appendix D.2, available
online. □
Theorem 3. Partially Stable): MSDA produces a partially
stable matching between the set of tasks T and FNs F.
Proof: Since MSDA satisﬁes the properties of PL-fairness
and individual rationality uniquely, the matching generated by
it is partially stable. □
Theorem 4. (Time Complexity): M-DAFTO converges with
the time complexity of O(m∗n), where m and n are the total
numbers of tasks and FNs, respectively.
Proof: The proof can be found in Appendix D.3, available
online. □
Theorem 5. ( NP -Hardness): The ofﬂoading problem in M-
DAFTO is NP -Hard.
Proof: Appendix D.4, available online, contains the proof for
NP -Hardness. □
Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INST OF INFO TECH AND MANAGEMENT. Downloaded on June 08,2026 at 06:21:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 11 ---
3938 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 17, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2024
VI. P ERFORMANCE EVA L U AT I O N
For simulation, the iFogSim simulator has been used [34].
In this section, we have discussed the environmental setup and
elaborately analyzed the simulation results.
A. Environmental Setup
The IoT devices and FNs are deployed statically, and the
distance between an IoT and a FN is uniformly distributed
U[50,500] meters. The uplink and downlink bandwidth is 20
MHz [15]. For experimentation, we consider 4 test scenarios,
S-1, S-2, S-3, and S-4 for 250, 500, 750, and 1000 tasks and 5
FNs. Further, we perform 10 test runs for each scenario, and we
examine the comparative behavior of protocols. The input size,
computational requirement, deadline, and output size are gener-
ated uniformly in the range U[300,600] Kb,U[210,480] million
cycles, and U [15,22] s, and U [10,20] Kb, respectively [1].
Moreover, the transmission power of di and noise power are
set to 0.5 W and 10−10 W respectively [15]. FN parameters,
such as computational resources and number of VRUs, are
uniformly set in U [6,10] GHz and U[200,500], respectively,
with each FN having a transmission power of 1 W. The free
space path loss between an IoT and a FN fj in PCS-1900 GSM
band is determined as pldi ,fj =3 8.02+20 log10(dist(di,f j))
dB, where dist(di,f j) represents the distance between an IoT
and a FN. Considering pldi ,fj , the channel gain hi,j is derived
as hi,j =1 0−(pldi ,fj )/10.
B. The Baseline Algorithms
We have considered the following baselines to compare the
performance of M-DAFTO.
r A matching theory framework for tasks ofﬂoading in fog
computing for IoT systems (MBTO) [13]: It aims to min-
imize the total ofﬂoading delay by reducing the worst
completion times of tasks. Ofﬂoading is modeled as a
matching between IoTs and FNs, with a maximum quota at
the FNs. To obtain a stable assignment, the authors adopt
a DA algorithm variant.
r LETO [15]: This work reduces the total ofﬂoading delay
and number of outages in an IoT-Fog setup. The ofﬂoading
is formulated as a matching game with maximum and min-
imum quotas at the FNs. A multistage deferred acceptance
(MSDA) algorithm generates a stable ofﬂoading schedule.
r Heuristic-based task ofﬂoading (HTO) [12]: It randomly
ofﬂoads tasks in a non-increasing order of their input size
to FNs.
r GPM [14]: It greedily assigns the tasks to the FNs having
the maximum number of VRUs.
C. Simulation Results
M-DAFTO’s performance is validated considering three met-
rics, i.e., (i.) Performance-based; (ii.) Matching-based; and (iii.)
Utilization-based. Subsequently, we provide a detailed insight
into each category.
Fig. 3. Total ofﬂoading delay ( s) versus scenarios.
1) Performance-Based Metrics: The primary evaluation
metrics, such as total ofﬂoading delay and outages, are studied
in this category.
Total Ofﬂoading Delay:Fig. 3 captures the aggregate ofﬂoad-
ing delay in executing ofﬂoaded tasks at the FNs across different
scenarios. The ofﬂoading delay escalates with increasing tasks,
which is anticipated. However,M-DAFTO outperforms the base-
lines across scenarios by achieving minimum ofﬂoading delay.
This is attributed to the following reasons.First, the residual time
of larger tasks1 is often smaller owing to its higher computational
demand, resulting in limited ofﬂoading options, hence higher
urgency (17). Second, the PL dictates the processing order of
the tasks and favors the ofﬂoading of larger tasks having a
smaller deadline (18). Although LETO is similar to M-DAFTO,
the former differs in PL-ordering and FN preferences based on
the task’s deadline. This results in the preferable assignment
of tasks with a smaller deadline to computationally efﬁcient
FNs.2 Moreover, a smaller deadline does not necessarily imply
a smaller task. Hence, processing based on deadlines can push
larger tasks onto computationally inferior FNs, elevating the
ofﬂoading delay. MBTO, HTO, and GPM exhibit inferior per-
formance compared to M-DAFTO and LETO, as the IoTs do not
consider the FNs’ computational capabilities while generating
the ofﬂoading schedule. Considering the comparative behavior
of MBTO and HTO, the former outperforms the latter. However,
we observe a ﬂipped behavior for scenario S-3 due to the random
processing order of the FNs. Conversely, GPM has the worst
ofﬂoading delay due to greedy task ofﬂoading to FNs with the
highest VRUs.
Outages: It is the difference between tasks (T ) in the system
and successfully ofﬂoaded ones, which can be calculated per
(19).
O = {T}\{∪ n
j=1Υ(fj)} (19)
Fig. 4 illustrates the number of outages experienced by different
strategies across test scenarios. It can be inferred from Fig. 4
that the number of outages increases with increasing tasks.
M-DAFTO outperforms the baselines owing to the following
reasons. First, tasks rank the FNs in non-decreasing order of the
1Larger task imply a higher CPU demand
2Computationally efﬁcient FNs have higher compute capabilities for the
VRUs.
Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INST OF INFO TECH AND MANAGEMENT. Downloaded on June 08,2026 at 06:21:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 12 ---
SW AIN et al.: M-DAFTO: MULTI-STAGE DEFERRED ACCEPTANCE BASED FAIR TASK OFFLOADING IN IOT-FOG SYSTEMS 3939
Fig. 4. Outages versus scenarios.
Fig. 5. Average task satisfaction (%) versus scenarios.
ofﬂoading delays. Second, the tasks are processed at the FNs
based on their urgencies (refer to (17)). Third, the processing
order of the tasks enforced by the PL assists in pushing the
larger tasks onto computationally efﬁcient FNs. The combined
impact of the policies as mentioned above assists M-DAFTO in
achieving minimal outages. LETO exhibits inferior performance
compared to M-DAFTO as tasks having limited FN options for
successful execution are not prioritized during the assignment.
Large tasks may not have a smaller deadline; hence, their
processing is deferred in LETO. This results in their assign-
ments to inferior FNs due to limited capacities at faster FNs.
MBTO, HTO, and GPM are inconsiderate towards the FNs’
computational capabilities while generating IoT preferences and
deadlines for the tasks while generating the FN preferences.
2) Matching-Based Metrics: A primary metric to evaluate
the performance of matching-based techniques is thesatisfaction
factor of individual agents. It reﬂects an agent’s happiness with
its match, considering its preference list. Ideally, agents matched
to their more preferred choices have higher satisfaction.
Task Satisfaction Factor:Fig. 5 indicates the average satisfac-
tion factor of tasks for different matching-based strategies used
for comparison. Given thatti is matched to fj inΥ, satisfaction
factorSi,j(%) ofti can be computed as per(20). Here,rank(fj)
captures the position offj inpref(ti). The detailed computation
of the satisfaction of tasks for an example scenario is provided
in Appendix C.1, available online.
Si,j(%) =|pref(ti)|−rank(fj)
|pref(ti)| ∗100 (20)
It can be observed from Fig. 5 that M-DAFTO achieves the
highest task satisfaction compared to MBTO and LETO. This is
attributed to the fact that M-DAFTO executes the majority of the
Fig. 6. Average FN satisfaction (%) versus scenarios.
ofﬂoaded tasks within their prescribed deadlines (refer to Fig.4),
thereby achieving minimal outages. A task experiencing an out-
age has zero satisfaction; hence, excessive outages deleteriously
impact the average task satisfaction. As it can be inferred from
Fig. 4, LETO suffers more outages than M-DAFTO, resulting in
lower task satisfaction. On the other hand, MBTO achieves the
lowest satisfaction due to the maximum outages suffered during
ofﬂoading. However, task satisfaction in MBTO is relatively
consistent across scenarios. This is because MBTO ofﬂoads the
tasks to the FNs in close proximity, and a uniformly distributed
setup assists the protocol in achieving a relatively distributed
assignment.
FN Satisfaction Factor: Fig. 6 illustrates the average satisfac-
tion factor of FNs for different matching-based strategies. Given
a matching Υ,l e tΥ(fj) be the set of tasks matched to fj .T h e
satisfaction factor Sj,i(%) captures the satisfaction obtained by
fj in executing the ofﬂoaded taskti and is computed as per (21)
and (22). Here, count tracks the number of currently matched
agents per pref(fj). A detailed insight into the computation of
FN satisfaction is provided in Appendix C.2, available online.
Sj,i(%) =|pref(fj)|−rank(ti)
|pref(fj)|−count ∗100; ∀ti ∈Υ(fj) (21)
Sj(%) =
∑
∀i∈[1,m]& ti∈Υ(fj) Sj,i
min(h(fj),|pref(fj)|) ; ∀j ∈[1,n] (22)
It can be observed from Fig. 6 that the satisfaction of FNs
escalates with increasing tasks as the |pref(fj)| increases, con-
sequently boosting the satisfaction factor of similar options. It
can be inferred from Fig. 6 that M-DAFTO achieves the highest
satisfaction as it experiences minimal outages. Moreover, the
number of outages dictates the satisfaction of FNs for different
protocols, i.e., the higher the number of outages, the lower its
satisfaction.
3) Utilization-Based Metric: We also provide an insight into
the load distribution (used VRUs) of different schemes and study
their comparative behavior.
Resource Utilization: Fig. 7(a)–(d) highlight the utilization
of FNs for different schemes across test cases. The utilization
of FNs increases for increasing tasks, which is anticipated. The
FNs are utilized in non-increasing order of their computational
capabilities of VRUs (refer to Fig. 1 of Appendix E, available
online) owing to the setting of the preferences for IoTs based
on their ofﬂoading delays (refer to (16)). However, due to the
Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INST OF INFO TECH AND MANAGEMENT. Downloaded on June 08,2026 at 06:21:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 13 ---
3940 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 17, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2024
Fig. 7. FN resources utilization across scenarios.
Fig. 8. Gini index versus scenarios.
imposition of minimum quota in M-DAFTO and LETO, all
the FNs are assigned some tasks. MBTO obtains a relatively
distributed assignment compared to the baselines as the tasks
are preferably ofﬂoaded to the FNs in its proximity in a uni-
formly distributed IoT-Fog network. In HTO, tasks are assigned
FNs in a predeﬁned random sequence, enforcing a clustered
assignment of FNs appearing at the beginning of the random
sequence. Alternatively, GPM greedily ofﬂoads tasks to the FNs
in non-increasing order of their VRUs, resulting in a clustered
assignment at larger FNs.
Gini Index: It indicates the statistical dispersion or inequal-
ity measure of load across FNs [35]. The Gini index can be
computed as per (23), where ¯x = ∑n
j=1 |Υ(fj)|/n. It lies in the
0−1; a 0 value represents perfect equality, whereas 1 indicates
perfect inequality.
Gini(n)= 1
2n2¯x
n∑
j=1
n∑
k=1
||Υ(fj)|−|Υ(fk)|| (23)
Fig. 8 illustrates the Gini index across strategies for different test
scenarios. MBTO is the best protocol as it achieves a relatively
dispersed allocation owing to the nature of ofﬂoading in MBTO
and the uniformly distributed deployment of IoT devices. More-
over, M-DAFTO and LETO achieve the same load dispersion
due to similar allocation policies. The Gini index of M-DAFTO
and LETO is better than HTO and GPM. This is because of
the imposition of a minimum quota at FN in M-DAFTO and
LETO, which achieves non-clustered allocations. Moreover, the
Gini index of HTO is better than GPM as it performs greedy
assignments by selecting random FNs, resulting in clustered
allocation. On the other hand, GPM’s Gini index is the worst
as it performs greedy task assignments to FNs in decreasing
order of their VRUs (maximum quota), resulting in clustered
allocation.
Appendix E, available online, includes some additional simu-
lation results regarding the Jain fairness index, worst ofﬂoading
delay, and worst number of outages.
VII. C ONCLUSIONS &F UTURE DIRECTIONS
This paper proposed a framework M-DAFTO that generates
an efﬁcient ofﬂoading policy for the IoT-Fog interconnection
network. The ofﬂoading is modeled as a matching game with
maximum and minimum quotas at the FNs. To overcome the
shortcomings of the DA and operate with minimum quotas,
we adopted the MSDA to solve the problem mentioned above.
Further, the MSDA generates a partial stable assignment be-
tween IoTs and FNs in a polynomial time. Simulation results
conﬁrm that the proposed scheme achieves 30.26 % and 93.53
% reduction of total ofﬂoading delay and outages, respectively,
compared to the baselines. Though M-DAFTO achieves en-
hanced performance, the agents’ preferences are immutable.
The work can be extended to consider dynamic preferences,
including additional parameters such as ofﬂoading energy and
channel interference. Moreover, the ofﬂoading setup can also
be supplemented by including cloud resources in the IoT-Fog
interconnection network.
REFERENCES
[1] C. Swain et al., “METO: Matching-theory-based efﬁcient task ofﬂoading
in IoT-Fog interconnection networks,” IEEE Internet Things J. ,v o l .8 ,
no. 16, pp. 12 705–12 715, Aug. 2021.
[2] I. Sarkar, M. Adhikari, N. Kumar, and S. Kumar, “A collaborative com-
putational ofﬂoading strategy for latency-sensitive applications in fog net-
works,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 4565–4572, Mar. 2022.
[3] M. Adhikari, M. Mukherjee, and S. N. Srirama, “DPTO: A deadline and
priority-aware task ofﬂoading in fog computing framework leveraging
multilevel feedback queueing,” IEEE Internet Things J. , vol. 7, no. 7,
pp. 5773–5782, Jul. 2020.
[4] A. Kishor and C. Chakarbarty, “Task ofﬂoading in fog computing for
using smart ant colony optimization,” Wireless Pers. Commun., vol. 127,
pp. 1683–1704, 2022.
[5] C. Swain, M. N. Sahoo, A. Satpathy, K. Muhammad, S. Bakshi, and J.
J. P . C. Rodrigues, “A-DAFTO: Artiﬁcial cap deferred acceptance based
fair task ofﬂoading in complex IoT-fog networks,” IEEE Trans. Consum.
Electron., vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 914–926, Nov. 2023.
[6] L. Jiao, R. Friedman, X. Fu, S. Secci, Z. Smoreda, and H. Tschofenig,
“Cloud-based computation ofﬂoading for mobile devices: State of the art,
challenges and opportunities,” inProc. Future Netw. Mobile Summit, 2013,
pp. 1–11.
[7] C. Swain, M. N. Sahoo, and A. Satpathy, “SPA TO: A student project
allocation based task ofﬂoading in IoT-fog systems,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Commun., 2021, pp. 1–6.
Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INST OF INFO TECH AND MANAGEMENT. Downloaded on June 08,2026 at 06:21:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 14 ---
SW AIN et al.: M-DAFTO: MULTI-STAGE DEFERRED ACCEPTANCE BASED FAIR TASK OFFLOADING IN IOT-FOG SYSTEMS 3941
[8] C. Canali and R. Lancellotti, “GASP: Genetic algorithms for service
placement in fog computing systems,” Algorithms, vol. 12, no. 10, 2019,
Art. no. 201.
[9] Q. Wang and S. Chen, “Latency-minimum ofﬂoading decision and re-
source allocation for fog-enabled Internet of Things networks,” Trans.
Emerg. Telecommun. Technol., vol. 31, no. 12, 2020, Art. no. e3880.
[10] S. A. Zakaryia, S. A. Ahmed, and M. K. Hussein, “Evolutionary ofﬂoading
in an edge environment,” Egyptian Inform. J., vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 257–267,
2021.
[11] Y . Deng, P . Wang, and L. Li, “Task ofﬂoading for mixed cloud/fog com-
puting in vehicular network using genetic particle swarm optimization,”
in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Inf. Commun. Signal Process. , 2021, pp. 489–494.
[12] H. Bao and Y . Liu, “A two-sided matching approach for distributed edge
computation ofﬂoading,” in Proc. IEEE/CIC Int. Conf. Commun. China ,
2019, pp. 535–540.
[13] F. Chiti, R. Fantacci, and B. Picano, “A matching theory framework for
tasks ofﬂoading in fog computing for IoT systems,” IEEE Internet Things
J., vol. 5, no. 6, pp. 5089–5096, Dec. 2018.
[14] F. Chiti, R. Fantacci, F. Paganelli, and B. Picano, “Virtual functions
placement with time constraints in fog computing: A matching theory per-
spective,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 980–989,
Sep. 2019.
[15] C. Swain, M. N. Sahoo, and A. Satpathy, “LETO: An efﬁcient load
balanced strategy for task ofﬂoading in IoT-fog systems,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Web Serv., 2021, pp. 459–464.
[16] M. Mukherjee, S. Kumar, M. Shojafar, Q. Zhang, and C. X. Mavromous-
takis, “Joint task ofﬂoading and resource allocation for delay-sensitive fog
networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. , 2019, pp. 1–7.
[17] J. He, “Optimization of edge delay sensitive task scheduling based on ge-
netic algorithm,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Algorithms Data Mining Inf. Technol.,
2022, pp. 155–159.
[18] Z. Li and Q. Zhu, “Genetic algorithm-based optimization of ofﬂoading
and resource allocation in mobile-edge computing,” Information, vol. 11,
no. 2, 2020, Art. no. 83.
[19] A. Abouaomar, A. Kobbane, and S. Cherkaoui, “Matching-game for user-
fog assignment,” in Proc. IEEE Glob. Commun. Conf. , 2018, pp. 1–6.
[20] M. Ali, N. Riaz, M. I. Ashraf, S. Qaisar, and M. Naeem, “Joint cloudlet
selection and latency minimization in fog networks,” IEEE Trans. Ind.
Informat., vol. 14, no. 9, pp. 4055–4063, Sep. 2018.
[21] D. Nowak, T. Mahn, H. Al-Shatri, A. Schwartz, and A. Klein, “A gener-
alized nash game for mobile edge computation ofﬂoading,” in Proc. 6th
IEEE Int. Conf. Mobile Cloud Comput. Serv. Eng. , 2018, pp. 95–102.
[22] P . Kaur and S. Mehta, Improvement of Task Ofﬂoading for Latency Sensi-
tive Tasks in F og Environment. Singapore: Springer, 2022, pp. 49–63.
[23] Q. Luo, C. Li, T. H. Luan, and W. Shi, “Minimizing the delay and cost
of computation ofﬂoading for vehicular edge computing,” IEEE Trans.
Services Comput., vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 2897–2909, Sep./Oct. 2022.
[24] Y . Pan, H. Jiang, H. Zhu, and J. Wang, “Latency minimization for task
ofﬂoading in hierarchical fog-computing C-RAN networks,” inProc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Commun., 2020, pp. 1–6.
[25] M. Mukherjee, V . Kumar, S. Kumar, J. Lloret, Q. Zhang, and M. Guo,
“Reconﬁgurable intelligent surface-assisted edge computing to minimize
delay in task ofﬂoading,” in Proc. IEEE Glob. Commun. Conf. , 2021,
pp. 01–06.
[26] P . Liu, J. Li, and Z. Sun, “Matching-based task ofﬂoading for vehicular
edge computing,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 27 628–27 640, 2019.
[27] B. Y ang, M. Sun, X. Hong, and X. Guo, “A deadline-aware ofﬂoading
scheme for vehicular fog computing at signalized intersection,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Pervasive Comput. Commun. Workshops , 2020, pp. 1–6.
[28] Y . Sun, J. Song, S. Zhou, X. Guo, and Z. Niu, “Task replication for vehicular
edge computing: A combinatorial multi-armed bandit based approach,” in
Proc. IEEE Glob. Commun. Conf. , 2018, pp. 1–7.
[29] D. Gale and L. S. Shapley, “College admissions and the stability of
marriage,” Amer . Math. Monthly, vol. 69, no. 1, pp. 9–15, 1962.
[30] D. Fragiadakis, A. Iwasaki, P . Troyan, S. Ueda, and M. Y okoo, “Strate-
gyproof matching with minimum quotas,” ACM Trans. Econ. Computa-
tion, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 1–40, 2016.
[31] A. Satpathy, M. N. Sahoo, L. Behera, and C. Swain, “ReMatch: An efﬁcient
virtual data center re-matching strategy based on matching theory,” IEEE
Trans. Services Comput., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 1373–1386, Mar./Apr. 2023.
[32] O. Semiari, W. Saad, and M. Bennis, “Downlink cell association and load
balancing for joint millimeter wave-microwave cellular networks,” inProc.
IEEE Glob. Commun. Conf., 2016, pp. 1–6.
[33] A. Satpathy, M. N. Sahoo, A. K. Sangaiah, C. Swain, and S. Bakshi,
“CoMap: An efﬁcient virtual network re-mapping strategy based on coali-
tional matching theory,” Comput. Netw., vol. 216, 2022, Art. no. 109248.
[34] H. Gupta, A. V . Dastjerdi, S. K. Ghosh, and R. Buyya, “iFogSim: A toolkit
for modeling and simulation of resource management techniques in the
Internet of Things, edge and fog computing environments,” Softw. Pract.
Experience, vol. 47, no. 9, pp. 1275–1296, 2017.
[35] Z. Ning, L. Guo, Y . Peng, and X. Wang, “Joint scheduling and routing
algorithm with load balancing in wireless mesh network,” Comput. Elect.
Eng., vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 533–550, 2012.
Chittaranjan Swain (Graduate Student Member,
IEEE) received the MTech degree in computer sci-
ence engineering from VIT University, V ellore, India.
He is a computer science and engineering research
scholar with NIT Rourkela, India. His research in-
terests include cloud computing, fog computing, and
Internet of Things.
Manmath Narayan Sahoo (Member, IEEE) re-
ceived the PhD degree in computer science from NIT
Rourkela, India, in 2014. He is an assistant professor
with CSE, NIT Rourkela, India. He has been a re-
viewer, guest editor, track chair, and program chair in
many journals and conferences. His research interests
include mobile Ad-hoc networks, sensor networks,
and cloud computing.
Anurag Satpathy(Graduate Student Member, IEEE)
received the PhD degree in computer science and
engineering from the National Institute of Technol-
ogy, Rourkela, India. He is a post-doctoral fellow
with the Department of Computer Science, Missouri
University of Science and Technology, Rolla, MO,
USA. His research interests include cloud computing,
the Internet of Things, and distributed systems.
Sambit Bakshi (Senior Member, IEEE) is currently
with the Department of Computer Science and Engi-
neering, National Institute of Technology Rourkela,
India. His area of interests include surveillance, bio-
metric security, and digital forensics. He presently
serves as associate editor of theIEEE Transactions on
Computational Social Systems, IEEE Transactions on
Technology and Society, IEEE Transactions on Edu-
cation, IEEE Systems Journal, Innovations in Systems
and Software Engineering Springer: A NASA Journal,
Expert Systems with Applications , Engineering Ap-
plications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence , Image and Vision Computing , Multimedia
Systems, Multimedia Tools and Applications ,a n d Neural Processing Letters .
He previously served as associate editor of the IEEE IT Professional Magazine,
IEEE Access, PLoS One,a n d Expert Systems in the past. He is founding chair
of IEEE Rourkela Subsection and IEEE Kolkata Section Biometrics Council
Chapter. He serves as a distinguished lecturer of IEEE Systems Council for
2023-2025. He has published widely in more than 100 journals and conferences.
Soumya K. Ghosh (Senior Member, IEEE) received
the PhD degree in computer science and engineering
from the IIT, Kharagpur. Currently, he is a professor
with the Department of Computer Science and Engi-
neering, IIT Kharagpur. Prior to joining IIT Kharag-
pur, he was with the ISRO, working in the area of
satellite remote sensing and GIS. His research inter-
ests include cloud computing, spatial data science,
and IoT.
Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INST OF INFO TECH AND MANAGEMENT. Downloaded on June 08,2026 at 06:21:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
